Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
Tellerik create compelling app experiences
across any screen with the
Tellerik platform Telerx end to
end platform. Uniquely combines industry
leading UI tools with cloud
services to simplify the entire
app development cycle Tellerik offers
everything.net developers need to build
quality apps faster. Try it
free at tellerik.com/platform that's tellerik.com/platform.
From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number four 97. In
this episode, Scott talks with
Kenton Barta about his startup
sandstorm.io. Hi, this is Scott.
Well, this is another episode
of Hansel minutes today. I'm
talking with Kenton Varda. Who's
a co founder and lead
developer on sandstorm@sandstorm.io. How are
you? Great, thanks for chatting
with me today. When I
saw sandstorm for the first
time I went through the
demo of the Treme area
online and it was kind
of so fast and so
easy. I just assumed that
it was somehow faked. Could
you, can you explain what
it is and why? It's
interesting. Yeah, so sandstorm is
a radically easier way to
run a personal server or
a private cloud. So what
you saw there is you
started a fresh sandstorm server
and you installed apps into
it, much like you would
install apps on your phone,
through an app store, all
through point and click and
they just start up and
they run just like that.
And the goal is that
individual people should be able
to run their own servers
rather than going to, rather
than having the developers of
the web apps that you're
using, running the servers for
you both to give you
a better privacy, but also
to make it much easier
to make it easier for
developers to write apps because
they no longer have to
run those servers. And so
like there's a lot of
open source apps out there
that people can't really use
today because you have to
run your own server to
use them. And no one
really wants to spend the
time do that. This makes
those accessible to everybody. Yeah.
It seems like if you
tell people what you just
said, tight techies will go,
well, no, it's not that
big of a deal. He's
just like register a domain,
but normal human beings may
very well have a need
for an application. Like, think
about how complicated is just
to start your own blog
and companies like medium and
Facebook exists for that very
reason that it was really,
really hard to register a
domain, hook it up to
a web server and put
an app there. And here
we are pouring our words
into medium. Yep. Yeah. And,
and you should, you should
be able to set that
up for yourself. So is
this not just making developers
lives easier, but you anticipate
that like normal humans should
be able to think about
the web, like an app
store, but an open source
app store. Yes. So With
sandstorm and it's important to
make this very clear, the
developers do not run the
server. It's the end user
that does. So you are
as a developer shipping an
app to them, for them
to run. So you don't
have to carry a pager
or anything. But So it
is a private cloud. It's
fun to say cloud I'm,
you know, I'm old and
some people love it. Some
people hate it. Yeah. I'm
old enough to remember when
the cloud was just the
Linux box in your server
and you're in your closet
rather. Yep. So like, for
example, I'll just use my
Synology as an example, but
my Synology is a little
Linux machine. That's literally sitting
in my, in my, in
my closet. I've always been
able to SSH into it,
but I have to admit
that I haven't really put
apps on it a lot
until they had an app
store. I think there are
probably people who do have
servers or can get a
Linux server, but that's, as
far as they can go,
do I have to go
and SSH into machines to
do this? How much technical
stuff do I have to
know in order to, to
run sandstorm? Yeah. So the,
the goal is you never
know Use SSH. You never
use text editors when you're
using sandstorm. Yeah. I, I
like you, you know, I've
had the ability to run
my own server for the
past 15 years. I've had
the knowhow, but I haven't
really done it because it's
just a lot of work.
So To install sandstorm, if
you want to install it
on your own physical machine,
there is still a step
where you have to run
something in the shell. Sure.
But we're working on making
that even easier. And you
also have the option of
using a managed hosting service
that, you know, hosts starts
up sandstorm for you. And
for those who don't want
to take that one step
in the shell, but once,
once you've got it installed,
then everything else is pointed
And you never think about
it again. Yeah. Pretty much
it self updates, Everything. So
then people who are listening
might say, well, wait a
second. Isn't that Docker didn't
he just described Docker that
gave it a different name.
No, because with Docker, Docker
is a tool for assist
admins and for developers to
launch their services, using a
shell and using config files.
It is not something that
is aimed at end users,
non technical end users, and
a nontechnical end user can
not run their own Docker.
Well, and arguably some technical
users, can't either, I'm still
struggling a little bit with
the Docker client, the command
line. Yeah. So then in
a world where we've got
virtual machines and we've got
Linux containers, we've got Docker,
we've got Heroku, you know,
get deploy a couple of
years ago, get deployed. It
was like the peak of
app deployment. Do you think
that something like sandstorm is
like, that's the ideal, you
should just be able to
have a, a website that
you can go to, to
administer all of your applications
and both authors and people
who run these apps just
don't have to think about
the administration anymore. The administrivia
Absolutely. There's a lot of
boiler plate that web developers
have to deal with today.
It's not just running the
servers, but it's also, you
know, authentication sharing models, access
control, security, making sure that,
that they they've locked everything
down, perhaps encrypting user data,
all of that is stuff
that sandstorm can take care
of in, in the sandstorm
world. And so as an
app developer, all you have
to do is focus on,
On your business logic, An
example of that. So we
have an app on sandstorm
called we can, it's at
the very top of the
app store. If you look,
and what it is is
it's similar to, well, it's
a Kanban board, so it's
similar to Trello. And in
my opinion, it is better
than Trello. Like they've, they
produced something that, I mean,
it's, it's pretty similar, but
they've got all the features.
I prefer using it over
Trello, But there's probably not
a hosted version, right. That
you can't like, I can
go to trello.com and they
host it for me, right.
If I want my Kanban
board, If we can, you
of course have to run
it on your own server,
but you can run it
on sandstorm. And the interesting
thing to me is that
this was an app developed
by two guys, one in
one in Turkey and one
in France, basically in their
spare time. And they have
matched the quality of competing
SaaS apps. It was just
that, you know, SAS apps
that have presumably dozens of
developers on them. So that's
just, that's how much easier
it is to develop an
app. And I think that
the significant aspect of this
is that if you were
going to start up a
company today, you'll go and
you'll get your Google apps,
your officer 65, you'll get
Trello, Yokota, get hub. Suddenly
you're a little company of
one or two people has
dependencies on 12, 15, 20,
you know, software as a
service vendors. And you're going
to be sending them a,
I don't know, a couple
of bucks a month, there's
the monetary aspect of things.
But there's also the control
aspect of things. You might
decide that, you know, food.bar
is the best bug tracking
software ever. And then one
day you wake up and
that has failed and they've
gone out of business. You
have this dependency chain, but
if you bring that cloud
and manage it yourself with
open source apps, then you
have a lot more control.
Right, Right, right. Yeah. When
it comes to SAS, you
know, it's one thing to
decide to use Google or
Microsoft product. It's another thing
to decide, to use the
products of a small startup
that you don't know how
far they're going to go.
And also you don't really
know what their security practices
are like, like you can,
you can be pretty sure
that that Google is good
at security, but some random
startup who knows. And so
with, with sand storm, you
know, you're handling well, sandstorm
handles a lot of the
security and actually that's a
whole nother conversation that we
should get into at some
point. But yeah, yeah. I
do want to cover the
extra security aspects, But the
control part is I think
very, very interesting because if
you've got your small startup
in the, in the old
days, you know, pre personal
cloud, someone had to be
it, someone had to manage
that server. Someone had to
think about that server, that
server had, I call it
psychic weight that has nothing
to do with the business.
Right. So one of the
reasons I think that SAS
has caught on in the
past 10 to 15 years
is because it's been so
much easier to set up
and use, you know, you
don't have to be technical
to register for one of
these accounts. And I think
that it is entirely possible
for us to get the
same ease of use with
quote unquote on-prem software with
the right platform under it.
That makes it really easy
to install things. And so
that is what sensor I
was trying to do. And
once it's, you know, as
easy to use on prem
software and your own server,
as it is to use
SAS, why would anyone choose
SAS? And I get this
question a lot, people say,
well, you know, why would
anyone care about running their
own server? Just like back
in the seventies, people said,
why would anyone want to
have a personal computer? But
you know, if it's equally
all other things being equal,
why would you not want
to keep your data on
your own machine? No, that's
a really interesting question. Like
my email has been in
Google apps for forever eight
years. Right. And my files
are in Dropbox and I'm
okay with that. But my
personal photos are in my
closet. I have them backed
up to crash plan, but
I've never really felt comfortable
sending all that data out
when I'm just going to
look at it internally. Anyway.
So it's control. It's a,
it's a sense of safety.
There's a sense of, I
think it's control, isn't it?
Yeah. And, and flexibility. And
being able to choose which
apps you run, you know,
all these SAS services, when
you're, you're signed up to
a 10 different SAS services,
none of them usually integrate
with each other really well.
Like they'll all integrate specifically
with Google, but they won't
integrate with each other. And
part of that is just
because it's kind of hard
for them to deal with
the, the access control and
implementing OAuth and such. Whereas
if everything's under one roof
in one login system, as
it is with sandstorm, then
it is much easier to
integrate apps. Okay. Okay. So
let's get a little more
technical and get some, some
context. So people who are
listening probably are familiar with
VMs and they realized that
they could, if they wanted
to fire up a VM,
put a web server on
a machine, install an application
and they, they can do
that. Now they could go
and do Docker that may
people may be listening and
saying, well, you know, Docker
is fine. It's easy enough.
What is sandstorm? Does it
sit on top of one
of those things or is
it its own kind of
container? So we use the
same Linux kernel features that
Docker uses for containerization. We
have our own containerization layer
built on top of that.
It's actually not very big.
Like it's, it's pretty easy
to use the system calls.
So it's, you know, a
couple of hundred lines of
code. So we don't really
think of that as a
major feature of sandstorm, but
rather an implementation detail. But
yeah, it's those same features
Is this what's called L
M LXE Alec C is
actually another set of scripts
that sit on top of
these same, same kernel features,
but we use the system
calls directly. Okay. So you're
using the containerization stuff that
is built into Linux. And
that you'd like to say,
that's an implementation detail on
your website though. You call
out security more, more than
I've seen lightweight container systems
call out before, because they
always say that it's not
a strong boundary, like a
virtual machine is why do
you do that? So most
of those other container systems
really are not good at
sandboxing. We do a number
of things that they don't
do. The main things are
attack surface reduction and designing
a platform API that's actually
sandboxable. So attack surface reduction
means the Linux kernel has
vulnerabilities found all of the
time because it has an
enormous API and there's bugs
in various system calls or
other parts. And so like
on a, basically a weekly
or monthly basis, there is
a new privilege. Escalation exploit
found in the Linux kernel.
And most of those will
allow you to break out
of a container. But on
sand storm, we drastically reduce
the Lennox API by using
set comp BPF, to disable
a lot of system calls,
exotic system calls that a
web app has no business
calling. We don't Mount proxy.
We don't Mount CSFs. Those
are huge interfaces that are
not very well reviewed. We,
the only devices visible in
the container are null zero
and you random, which are
very heavily used devices that
are pretty simple. And well-reviewed
as a result in, in
the last year, I believe
there has been one bug
that possibly theoretically was a
sandstorm breakout. Although no one
was able to actually produce
a working exploit on that
one. Do you believe that
Surface reduction is probably like
the number one thing that
anybody can do to make
their site more Well it's
tricky because these things, so
there, there is a constant
tension between compatibility and security.
So if you've disabled, a
bunch of system calls, there
will be some apps that
will want to use one
of those and they'll have
to be tweaked to not
use it and use something
else. And that's why with
something like Docker, where they
want to run arbitrary off
the shelf, Linux apps, they
can't really do that, or
they can't set it up
by default. Whereas we're willing
to say, well, apps that
are part of the sandstorm
do need to be tweaked
slightly as part of the
packaging process. So if they
are doing one of these
things, they need to stop.
It's generally not hard to
tweak them, but it is
a thing that needs to
be done. This episode of
Hansel minutes is brought to
you by Braintree code for
easy online payments. If you're
building a mobile app and
you're searching for a simple
payment solution, check out Braintree,
the brain tree v.zero SDK
makes it easy to offer
multiple mobile payment types. So
you can start accepting PayPal,
Apple pay Bitcoin, Venmo, credit
cards, and more all with
a single integration, one small
snippet of code. And you're
set up in less than
10 minutes. If you don't
have time, you can give
them a call. They'll even
handle the integration for you
and walk you through it.
The SDK supports seven languages,
dotnet node, Java, Perl, PHP,
Python, and Ruby elegant code
clear documentation to learn more.
And for your first $50,000
in transactions fee free, go
to brain tree payments.com/hanselman that's
Braintree payments.com/hanselman. So On the
one hand with Docker or
something like that, you've got
the will run pretty much
anything just as it is.
And then there's the potential
for someone to make a
more app store permissive. Like,
you know, when an application
comes down on an Android
device and says, Hey, I
really need to talk to
your microphone. Someone could say,
Nope, no microphone apps. Or
if you're going to do
microphone apps, This API, or
you could add something in
sandstorm to ask permission. Yeah.
So that's the other part
of making something that's sandboxable
is that you need to
have a platform API that
actually makes sense for sandboxing
where the app is, has
some way to request permissions
that the user is able
to grant in a sensible
way. So take the example
of an app that needs
to send notification emails on
a typical, you know, VM
or Docker solution. You might
need to give it a
port 25 ability to open
port 25 on your SMTP
server and an end user
doesn't know what that means
on sand storm. Instead it
would be, I request the
ability to send emails and
then the sandstorm UI will
come up and guide the
user through choosing what email
address to send, as you
know, perhaps if the, and
this is stuff that we're
still working on, but if
the user has some domains
attached to their sandstorm server,
then sensor and we'll say,
okay, choose a domain. Okay.
Now type an email address.
Okay. Now we'll grant specifically
this email address to the
app and at the low
level, the way we represent
that is through something called
Caton prodo, which is our
RPC communications layer. And it
makes it really easy to,
to represent arbitrary permissions as
an object, an object reference
that the app receives and
then can start making calls
to. And, and just as
a small aside for people
who might be curious about
that, captain prodo is like,
is it protocol buffers plus
plus plus, is it V2
or is this an entirely
new concept on top of
protocol buffers? I like to
think of it as a
successor to protocol buffers. So
I used to work at
Google for a while. I
was the one man part
above team. I was largely
responsible for opensourcing proto buffs.
Captain prodo is a replacement
for protocol buffers. That is
so after I left Google,
I worked on captain prodo
and it's all the things
that I would have wanted
to do, but I couldn't
do on Pardot buffs because
Google had too much data
in the existing format. So
Kevin prodo is infinity times
faster than pro buffs. I
like to say the reason
being that the wire format
is also appropriate is an
in memory format. So when
you read in a message,
you don't have to go
through a parsing step. You
can just start using it.
Is it infinity temps faster
all the time? Or just
on the read, like on
the right. Someone had to
write it though, right On
both read and write because
you, you build the message.
Well, through the Caton protal
library, you build the message
in memory, in exactly the
format in which it's going
to be written out. So
there's no serialization step. I
see. So it's a mem
copy kind of a situation
you're stacking your Tetris blocks
as they're coming down neatly
with minimal if for any.
Right. Right. And, and yeah,
once you write it out,
it's just, it's just a
mem copy. Or you can
do things like M map
memory map in a file
and read it as a
captain prodo structure. And only
the parts of the file
that you actually look at
will be loaded in from
disc. So there's a lot
of neat things you can
do with that. And then
on top of that, there's
the RPC layer, which protocol
buffers, at least in my
time, we weren't able to
release an RPC system on
top of it. But captain
Pareto has the built in
RPC system. And the interesting
thing about it is that
it's object capability based, which
is a, a branch of
security theory. But the, the
basic idea is object references
are a first class type.
You can send someone a
message that contains a reference
to an object that they
didn't know about before when
they received the reference implicitly
receive permission to use the
object, whereas before they received
the reference, they had no
ability to address the object
in the first place. And
on top of that, you
can build all kinds of
complex interactions between neutrally non-trusting
parties and have it be
secure. And the, just for
folks that are interested in
that separate conversation, captain prodo
is under the sandstorm IO
organization on GitHub. And it's,
it's, CAAP N captain prodo
when you go off and,
and Google for to find
that one other thing that
is fundamental at appears to
a sandstorm is, is meteor,
is that because meteor is
of, is a favorite thing
or, and you wrote much
of it in meteorite, even
though I understand that Santorum
can have apps written in
any language. Yeah. So it's
not, I wouldn't call it
fundamental. Okay. The thing about
meteor is that, so for
sensor can run apps written
in any tech stack that
runs on Linux, but early
on, we wrote tools specifically
for media that made it
easier to take a meatier
app and package it for
sandstorm because meteor apps are
laid out in a certain
predictable way. So that makes
it easier to write a
tool around it. Whereas the
more general tool requires a
bit more configuration to build
your app. So, and I
do like meteor as a
way to write a high
quality reactive web app quickly.
We used it for the
sandstorm front end, and generally
that's been a good experience
for me, but I would
also say that more recently
we've started developing tools, targeting
other specific tech stacks. So
the, the meteor advantage is,
is decreasing at this point
by virtue of the others.
I see. So then if
anyone who has a tech
stack or is interested in
a tech stack who might
be listening, they could go
and look at how the
implementation of the, of media
or the other apps that
create sandstorm packages. And they
could do that themselves. I
could do this with.net on
Linux and make the sandstorm
packaging tools. Yeah. So there's
a, there are sort of
a Swiss army knife tool
is something called Vagrant SPK,
meaning you use Vagrant to
run a Linux VM and
then create SPK, which are
sandstorm package files with it.
And it has basically configurations
for a bunch of different
stacks and we are continually
adding more stacks and improving
those existing configuration. So yeah,
it would be, it would
be cool to have a.net
stack support in there, but
it is also possible to
do things in a general
way where it does Vagrant
SBK does not have to
know about your stack already.
Very cool. Well, I can
definitely make the.net one happen
so that we'll have that
conversation offline. That's a good
idea. So is sandstorm, is
it a company or an
open source project or both?
It is both. So we
are a startup. We are,
we have received seed funding,
but we're also open source.
So the version of sandstorm
that runs on a single
machine, the, the, what you
would want as an individual
user is completely open source
Apache, two license. We are
working on an enterprise product,
which will be how we
fund things, basically features that
only companies with a lot
of money would want, we
will put in that product
and sell it. And one
of those is the ability
to take a cluster of
machines and treat it as
a single large sandstorm instance
and have it sort of
self-manage the load balancing. And
that is our managed hosting
product is, is built on
that. And we will eventually
be selling that. Yeah. Okay.
So then I can, as
a personal user, I can
do this. Now I can
take my Linux machine and
I can set up my
own private cloud with Linux
at home or whatever. Yeah.
If an enterprise that's going
to be your enterprise product
and I could go and
do that now, does that
mean I can host it
myself? Or do you use
your managed hosting? So you
can do either a, we
have a managed hosting service
for people who don't want
to run their own physical
machine, but it's, it's up
to you. It's Weird though,
because I thought it was
like a personal cloud, but
now I'm back to hosting
with you. Yeah. So We
get this question a lot.
The thing is that even
if you're using our managed
hosting, we still aren't the
app developer. So you still
have the separation between the
developer and the host. And
by having that separation you
as the user, get a
lot more power power to
run the apps that you
choose. And moreover, if you
decide at some point that
you would rather have your
own machine, you can easily
move all of the apps
from the managed hosting to
your own, because it's the
same set of apps because
it sands storm in both
places. So portability and vendor
lock in. Those are the
important things, and there is
total portability and there's no
vendor lockin. Exactly. And, and
yeah, the, the purpose of
the managed hosting for us
is actually not so much
about making money, but rather
making sandstorm available to as
many users as possible, because
there are a lot of
users who just aren't going
to run a physical machine,
but we want that ecosystem
to be as large as
possible so that the people
who do run their own
machine get high quality apps.
The point about that ecosystem,
if I've got an application,
like I've got a blog
that I wrote in some
language, what do I need
to do if I want
to get that into the
sandstorm marketplace and make it
available to the ecosystem? Yeah.
So you will want to
go use Vagrant SPK, and
there's there's documentation online@docsdotsandstorm.io. Basically
you are going to create
an SPK package that contains
all of your, your dependencies.
It's, it's similar to like
a Docker image or a
VM image. And then you,
you submit that by doing
Vagrant SPK publish to our,
to our app market. And
we basically look over it
just to make sure there's
no typos or obvious missing
information. And then we approve
it From a security perspective.
Again, it's, it's it's compartmentalize.
So could I publish an
evil thing? And it would
make its way up into
the sandstorm marketplace as an
evil thing, or what would
it matter? So you could
publish an evil thing, but
the app runs inside a
sandbox where it's segregated from
the rest of the system.
And so you would have
to publish an evil thing
and convince users to give
it permissions that it can
do evil things with. And
yeah, generally we're more worried
about apps that are buggy
because people aren't good at
writing or are a lot
of app developers are just
not any good at making
their apps secure. And we
want to make sure that
on sand storm, you don't
really have to worry about
that because sandstorm will, eh,
isolate the app in such
a way that those bugs
don't matter. So, as an
example, every ether pad document
you create, which is a,
it's a document editor is
run in a separate container,
isolated from all the others.
So that means that a
bug, an ether pad, which
allows someone who has access
to one document to get
access to others, doesn't matter
on sandstorm. And, and only
the people that you've shared
that document to through the
sandstorm interface possibly get access.
So through things like that,
we've seen lots of bugs
in individual apps that just
don't affect sandstorm. Very cool.
What do most apps do
for databases? Yeah, so the
app gets a slice of
file system to, to store,
to and can run whatever
database it wants. So we
generally recommend SQL Lite because
generally since it's one document
per container, you're dealing with
a small amount of data
and it just doesn't make
sense to run a large
database, but we do see
apps that use my SQL
or Mongo or anything else.
You just put it in
your package along with, with
your front end. Is there
anything that you wouldn't run
in sand storms or anything
that's too big or too
intense or too, whatever that
you'd be like? Yeah. That's
probably not what we're. Yeah.
So sandstorm is not intended
to run SAS apps, meaning
apps where you're, you're primarily
like you wouldn't. So an
app where your users are
external and they don't know
that sand storm is behind
it or an app where
you want to scale up
to a hundred million users.
You would not run on
that on sandstorm because sandstorm
is always supposed to be
interacting with the user and
are running small scale instances
of things. And we think
there's, there's plenty of infrastructure
out there already, specifically for
the case of scaling to
a hundred million users. And
that's just not a very
interesting space for us, even
though we could probably make
sand storm have features to
support that. It's, it's not
what we're aiming at. Okay.
So people can get involved
with in a number of
ways of increasing deepness. They
can get on your announcements
mailing list, right. They can
go check out the marketplace,
which is called Oasis, which
is an awesome name by
the way. Well that the
managed hosting service is Oasis.
Oh, I'm sorry. Forgive me.
This are the managed hosting
services Oasis. The marketplace is
just@whaturlappsdotsandstorm.io. It's just sensor map
marketplace. Very cool. And you've
got a really active community
on GitHub. You've gotten lots
of stars and lots of
forks. What do you think
people are doing with all
of these forks? Has anyone
run off and try to
do something really crazy with
sandstorm? Yeah. So there's a
pull request that I need
to get to this week
that I'm pretty excited about
where someone has added the
headed support for web dev,
so that you can host
a, he's actually got the
own cloud file sync client
sinking to a sand storm
app that I guess he
wrote himself. This requires that
the HTTP bridge between them
support the full web dev
protocol, which is an extension
to HTTP. So I'm excited
about getting that emerged in
so that people can do
File sync to sandstorm. Yeah.
That is pretty slick in
a world of rest. We're
only thinking of a couple
of HTTP verbs. There's a
whole lot of methods that
you have to do to
make web dev, which we
think of as being kind
of an older and older
thing, but it's still extremely
useful. And that definitely would
be great for, for businesses.
Very cool. Well, I really
appreciate you taking the time
to chat with me today.
Thanks. So again, you can
check out sandstorm@sandstorm.io. This has
been another episode of Hanselminutes
and we'll see you again
next week. .